{{short description|Parasitic disease of animals}}
{{Distinguish|Coccidioidomycosis}}
'''Coccidiosis''' is a [[parasitic disease]] of the intestinal tract of animals caused by [[coccidia]]n [[protozoa]]. The disease spreads from one animal to another by contact with infected [[feces]] or ingestion of infected tissue. [[Diarrhea]], which may become bloody in severe cases, is the primary symptom. Most animals infected with coccidia are [[asymptomatic]], but young or [[Immunodeficiency|immunocompromised]] animals may suffer severe symptoms and death.

While coccidia can infect a wide variety of animals, including humans, birds, and [[livestock]], they are usually species-specific. One well-known exception is [[toxoplasmosis]] caused by ''[[Toxoplasma gondii]]''.<ref>{{cite web |url=http://quizlet.com/1845324/parasitology-6-phylum-apicomplexa-coccidia-eimeria-toxoplasma-cryptosporidium-etc-flash-cards/ |title=Parasitology 6 - Phylum Apicomplexa - Coccidia, Eimeria, Toxoplasma, Cryptosporidium, etc. |accessdate=20 January 2014}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.sheepandgoat.com/articles/coccidiosis2011.html |title=Coccidiosis |accessdate=20 January 2014}}</ref>

Humans may first encounter coccidia when they acquire a dog, cat or bird that is infected. Other than ''T. gondii'', the infectious organisms are canine and feline-specific and are not contagious to humans, unlike the [[zoonosis|zoonotic diseases]].{{cn|date=July 2022}}

==Coccidia in dogs==
Puppies are frequently infected with coccidia from the feces of their mother, and are more likely to develop coccidiosis due to their undeveloped immune systems. Stress can trigger symptoms in susceptible animals.<ref>{{cite web |url=http://coccidiaindogs.com/treatment-for-coccidia/coccidia-treatment-for-puppies/ |title=Coccidia Treatment for Puppies |accessdate=20 January 2014 |archive-date=1 February 2014 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20140201231617/http://coccidiaindogs.com/treatment-for-coccidia/coccidia-treatment-for-puppies/ |url-status=dead }}</ref>

Symptoms in young dogs include diarrhea with [[mucus]] and [[blood]], poor appetite, vomiting, and dehydration. Untreated, the disease can be fatal.

Treatment is routine and effective. Diagnosis is made by low-powered [[microscopy|microscopic]] examination of the feces, which is generally replete with oocysts. Readily available drugs eliminate the protozoa or reduce them enough that the animal's immune system can clear the infection. Permanent damage to the gastrointestinal system is rare, and a dog will usually suffer no long-lasting negative effects.

==Coccidia in chickens==
Coccidiosis is a significant disease for chickens, especially affecting the young chicks. It can be fatal or leave the bird with compromised digestion. There are chick feed mixes that contain a coccidiostat to manage exposure levels and control disease. In an outbreak, coccidiocidal medications are given. Examples are [[toltrazuril]] (Baycox) or [[amprolium]]. After multiple infections, surviving chickens become resistant to the coccidia.{{Citation needed|date=June 2020}}

==Coccidia in cattle==
Coccidiosis (in cattle also known as Eimeriosis) is one of the most important diseases in calves and youngstock both under housing conditions and when grazing. Symptoms are generally caused by the species ''[[Eimeria zuernii]]'' and ''Eimeria bovis'' and include loss of appetite, fatigue, dehydration, and watery, sometimes bloody, diarrhoea.<ref>{{cite journal |last1=Daugschies |first1=A |last2=Najdrowski |first2=M |date=2005 |title=Eimeriosis in Cattle: Current Understanding |journal=J. Vet. Med. B |volume=52 |issue= 10|pages=417–427 |doi=10.1111/j.1439-0450.2005.00894.x|pmid=16364016 }}</ref> Outbreaks are known to occur in cattle herds. The parasite can infect all animals on the farm and in some countries the parasite is present on all farms.<ref>{{cite journal |last1=Lassen |first1=B |last2=Viltrop |first2=A |last3=Raaperi |first3=K |last4=Järvis |first4=T |date=2009 |title=Eimeria and Cryptosporidium in Estonian dairy farms in regard to age, species, and diarrhoea |journal=Vet. Parasitol. |volume=166 |issue=3–4 |pages=212–229 |doi=10.1016/j.vetpar.2009.08.022 |pmid=19747778}}</ref> Coccidiosis affects the growth and sometimes survival of the calves and consequently affect the production and the profitability of cattle livestock production.<ref>{{cite journal |last1=Lassen |first1=B |last2=Østergaard |first2=S |date=2012 |title=Estimation of the economical effects of Eimeria infections in Estonian dairy herds using a stochastic model |journal=Prev. Vet. Med. |volume=106 |issue=3–4 |pages=258–265 |doi=10.1016/j.prevetmed.2012.04.005 |pmid=22608299}}</ref>

==Coccidia in goats==
Coccidiosis is also present in goats, and is the largest cause of diarrhea in young goats.<ref>{{Cite web|author1=JM Luginbuhl|author2=Kevin Anderson|date=September 29, 2015|url=https://content.ces.ncsu.edu/coccidiosis-the-most-common-cause-of-diarrhea-in-young-goats|title=Coccidiosis, the Most Common Cause of Diarrhea in Young Goats|publisher=NC State Extension Publications|website=content.ces.ncsu.edu|language=en-US|access-date=2018-12-24}}</ref> It can also cause high temperature and loss of appetite.

==Genera and species that cause coccidiosis==
* Genus ''[[Isospora]]'' is the most common cause of intestinal coccidiosis in dogs and cats. Species of ''Isospora'' are host-specific, infecting only one species. Species that infect [[dog]]s include ''I. canis'', ''I. ohioensis'', ''I. burrowsi'', and ''I. neorivolta''. Species that infect [[cat]]s include ''I. felis'' and ''I. rivolta''.<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.capcvet.org/capc-recommendations/coccidia |title=Intestinal Parasites - Coccidia |accessdate=20 January 2014 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20140202144307/http://www.capcvet.org/capc-recommendations/coccidia |archive-date=2 February 2014 |url-status=dead}}</ref> The most common symptom is diarrhea. [[Sulfonamide (medicine)|Sulfonamides]] are the most common treatment.<ref name=Ettinger_1995>{{cite book|author1=Ettinger, S. J. |author2=Feldman, E. C. |title=Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine|edition=4th|publisher=W.B. Saunders Company|year=1995|isbn=978-0-7216-6795-9}}</ref>
* Genus ''[[Eimeria]]'' affects birds such as [[poultry]] and mammals such as [[cattle]] and rabbits.<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.medirabbit.com/EN/GI_diseases/Protozoal_diseases/Cocc_en.htm |title=Protozoal enteritis: Coccidiosis |accessdate=24 July 2014}}</ref> Species include ''E. tenella'', ''E. brunetti'', ''E. necatrix'', and ''E. acervulina''. Sulfonamides are effective.
* Genus ''[[Cryptosporidium]]'' contains two species known to cause [[cryptosporidiosis]], ''[[Cryptosporidium parvum|C. parvum]]'' and ''[[Cryptosporidium muris|C. muris]]''. Cattle are most commonly affected, and their feces may be a source of infection for other mammals, including humans. Recent genetic analyses of ''Cryptosporidium'' in humans have identified ''[[Cryptosporidium hominis|C. hominis]]'' as a human-specific pathogen. Infection occurs most commonly in [[immunodeficiency|immunocompromised]] individuals, such as dogs with [[canine distemper]], cats with [[feline leukemia virus|feline leukemia]], and humans with [[AIDS]].<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
* Genus ''[[Hammondia]]'' is transmitted by ingestion of [[cyst]]s found in the tissue of grazing animals and rodents. Dogs and cats are the definitive [[host (biology)|host]]s, with ''H. heydorni'' infecting dogs and the ''H. hammondi'' and ''H. pardalis'' infecting cats. Symptoms do not usually occur.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
* Genus ''[[Besnoitia]]'' infects cats that ingest cysts in the tissue of rodents and [[opossum]]s, but usually do not cause disease.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
* Genus ''[[Sarcocystis]]'' infects [[carnivore]]s that ingest cysts from various intermediate hosts. ''Sarcocystis'' may cause disease in dogs and cats.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
* Genus ''[[Toxoplasma]]'' has one important species, ''[[Toxoplasma gondii|T. gondii]]''. Cats are the definitive host, but all mammals and some fish, reptiles, and amphibians can be intermediate hosts. Only cat feces will hold infective oocysts, but infection through ingestion of cysts can occur with the tissue of any intermediate host. [[Toxoplasmosis]] occurs in humans usually as low-grade fever or muscle pain for a few days. A normal immune system will suppress the infection but the tissue cysts will persist in that animal or human for years or for life. In immunocompromised individuals, dormant cysts can be reactivated and cause lesions in the brain, heart, lungs, eyes, and other tissues. A fetus may be at risk if a pregnant woman without immunity becomes infected. Symptoms in cats include fever, weight loss, diarrhea, vomiting, [[uveitis]], and [[central nervous system]] signs. Disease in dogs includes paralysis, tremors, and seizures. Dogs and cats are usually treated with [[clindamycin]].<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
* Genus ''[[Neospora]]'' has one important species, ''[[Neospora caninum|N. caninum]]'', which affects dogs in a manner similar to toxoplasmosis. [[Neosporosis]] is difficult to treat.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
* Genus ''[[Hepatozoon]]'' contains one species that causes [[hepatozoonosis]] in dogs and cats, ''[[Hepatozoon canis|H. canis]]''. Animals become infected by ingesting an infected [[Rhipicephalus sanguineus|brown dog tick]] (''Rhipicephalus sanguineus''). Symptoms include fever, weight loss, and pain in the spine and limbs.

The most common medications used to treat coccidian infections are in the [[Sulfonamide (medicine)|sulfonamide]] antibiotic family.<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.wikigenes.org/e/chem/e/5338.html |title=Sulfachinoxalin 4-amino-N-quinoxalin-2-yl- benzenesulfonamide |work=WikiGenes |accessdate=19 July 2013 |author=White, G. |display-authors=etal |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20160304025619/http://www.wikigenes.org/e/chem/e/5338.html |archive-date=4 March 2016 |url-status=dead}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.lookfordiagnosis.com/mesh_info.php?term=Sulfaquinoxaline&lang=1 |title=Sulfaquinoxaline |publisher=www.lookfordiagnosis.com |accessdate=19 July 2013}}</ref>

Depending on the pathogen and the condition of the animal, untreated coccidiosis may clear of its own accord, or become severe and damaging, and sometimes cause death.

==References==
{{reflist}}

==External links==
* [https://www.facebook.com/reel/1300923157162941?fs=e&s=TIeQ9V&mibextid=u5sayY Reel of young doe (fawn) infected with Coccidiodus]

[[Category:Parasitic diseases]]
[[Category:Poultry diseases]]