{{Use dmy dates|date=March 2014}}
'''Polyneuropathy in dogs and cats''' is a collection of [[peripheral nervous system|peripheral nerve]] disorders that often are breed-related in these animals.  [[Polyneuropathy]] indicates that multiple nerves are involved, unlike [[mononeuropathy]].  Polyneuropathy usually involves [[motor nerve]] dysfunction, also known as '''lower motor neuron disease'''.  Symptoms include decreased or absent reflexes and muscle tone, weakness, or paralysis.  It often occurs in the rear legs and is [[symmetry (biology)#Bilateral symmetry|bilateral]].  Most are chronic problems with a slow onset of symptoms, but some occur suddenly.

==Most common types of polyneuropathy==
*'''[[Birman]] cat distal polyneuropathy'''  is an inherited disorder caused by decreased numbers of myelinated [[axon]]s in the central and peripheral nervous systems.<ref name=Chrisman_2003>{{cite book|author1=Chrisman, Cheryl |author2=Clemmons, Roger |author3=Mariani, Christopher |author4=Platt, Simon |title=Neurology for the Small Animal Practitioner|edition=1st|publisher=Teton New Media|year=2003|isbn=1-893441-82-2}}</ref>  [[Astrogliosis]] (an increase in the number of [[astrocyte]]s) is also noted.  The lesions are most commonly found in the [[Corticospinal tract|lateral pyramidal tract]] of the lumbar [[spinal cord]], the [[Fasciculus gracilis|fasciculi gracili]] of the dorsal column of the cervical spinal cord, and the [[cerebellum|cerebellar]] vermian [[white matter]].<ref name=Braund>{{cite web|author=Braund, K.G.|year=2003|title=Neuropathic Disorders|work=Braund's Clinical Neurology in Small Animals: Localization, Diagnosis and Treatment| url=http://www.ivis.org/advances/Vite/braund20b/chapter_frm.asp?LA=1#Birman_Cat|accessdate=2006-09-05}}</ref>  Symptoms start at the age of 8 to 10 weeks, and include frequent falling and walking on the [[hock (zoology)|hock]].<ref name=Ettinger_1995>{{cite book|author1=Ettinger, Stephen J. |author2=Feldman, Edward C. |title=Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine|edition=4th|publisher=W.B. Saunders Company|year=1995|isbn=0-7216-6795-3}}</ref>  The [[prognosis]] is poor.  The disease is suspected to have a [[recessive gene|recessive mode]] of inheritance.<ref name=LeCouteur>{{cite web | last = LeCouteur | first = Richard A. | title =  Feline Neuromuscular Disorders | work = Proceedings of the 28th World Congress of the World Small Animal Veterinary Association | year = 2003 | url = http://www.vin.com/proceedings/Proceedings.plx?CID=WSAVA2003&PID=6651&O=Generic | accessdate = 2006-09-05 }}</ref>
*'''[[Botulism]]''' is very rare in dogs and usually follows feeding on [[carrion]].<ref>{{cite journal |vauthors=Elad D, Yas-Natan E, Aroch I, Shamir M, Kleinbart S, Hadash D, Chaffer M, Greenberg K, Shlosberg A |title=Natural Clostridium botulinum Type C Toxicosis in a Group of Cats |journal=J Clin Microbiol |volume=42 |issue=11 |pages=5406–8 |year=2004 |pmid=15528757 |doi=10.1128/JCM.42.11.5406-5408.2004 |pmc=525276}}</ref>  Symptoms include weakness, difficulty eating, [[acute facial nerve paralysis]], and [[megaesophagus]].  Compared to other species, dogs and cats are relatively resistant to botulism.<ref>{{cite web | title = Botulism | work = The Merck Veterinary Manual | year = 2006 | url = http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/50707.htm | accessdate = 2007-02-10 }}</ref>
*'''Dancing Doberman disease''' primarily affects the [[gastrocnemius muscle]] in [[Doberman Pinscher|Doberman]]s.  It usually starts between the ages of 6 and 7 months.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>  One rear leg will flex while standing.  Over the next few months, it will begin to affect the other rear leg.  Eventually, the dog is alternatively flexing and extending each rear leg in a dancing motion.  Dancing Doberman disease progresses over a few years to rear leg weakness and muscle [[atrophy]].  No treatment is known, but most dogs retain the ability to walk and it is painless.<ref name=smdeg>{{cite web | title = Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Neuromuscular Junction: Degenerative Diseases | work = The Merck Veterinary Manual | year = 2006 | url = http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/100602.htm | accessdate = 2007-02-10 }}</ref>
*'''Diabetes neuropathy''' is more common in cats than dogs.  It is caused in part by prolonged [[hyperglycemia]] (high blood sugar) and results in dysfunction of one or both [[tibial nerve]]s and a [[plantigrade]] stance (down on the hocks).  It may resolve with treatment of the diabetes.<ref>{{cite web | title = Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Neuromuscular Junction: Metabolic Disorders | work = The Merck Veterinary Manual | year = 2006 | url = http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/100604.htm | accessdate = 2007-02-10 }}</ref>  The [[pathology]] of this condition in cats has been shown to be very similar to [[diabetic neuropathy]] in humans.<ref>{{cite journal |author= Mizisin, Andrew P.|title=Comparable myelinated nerve pathology in feline and human diabetes mellitus |journal=Acta Neuropathol |volume= 113|issue= 4|pages= 431–42|year=2007 |pmid=17237938|doi=10.1007/s00401-006-0163-8 |last2= Nelson |first2= RW |last3= Sturges |first3= BK |last4= Vernau |first4= KM |last5= Lecouteur |first5= RA |last6= Williams |first6= DC |last7= Burgers |first7= ML |last8= Shelton |first8= GD}}</ref>
*'''Distal symmetric polyneuropathy''' symptoms include atrophy of the [[anatomical terms of location|distal]] leg muscles and the muscles of the head, and rear limb weakness.  No treatment is known and the prognosis is poor.  This is most commonly seen in [[Chesapeake Bay Retriever]]s, [[St. Bernard (dog)|St. Bernard]]s, [[Great Dane]]s, [[Newfoundland (dog)|Newfoundland]]s, [[Collie]]s, and [[Labrador Retriever]]s.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
*'''[[Dysautonomia]]''' is primarily seen in cats.  Symptoms include vomiting, depression, anorexia, weight loss, dilated pupils, [[nictitating membrane|third eyelid]] protrusion, sneezing, slow heart rate, and [[megaesophagus]].  The prognosis is poor and supportive treatment is necessary.  Recovery in cats may take up to one year.<ref>{{cite web | title = Feline Dysautonomia | work = The Merck Veterinary Manual | year = 2006 | url = http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/100802.htm | accessdate = 2007-02-10 }}</ref>
*'''[[Giant axonal neuropathy]]''' is a rare disease in the [[German Shepherd dog]].  It usually becomes evident between the ages of 14 and 16 months.<ref name=Chrisman_2003/>  Symptoms include rear limb weakness, decreased reflexes, muscle atrophy, megaesophagus, and loss of bark.  No treatment is known and it has a poor prognosis.
*'''Hyperchylomicronemia''' or '''hyperlipoproteinemia''' is a type of inherited [[hyperlipidemia]] in cats.  Polyneuropathy is caused by stretching or compression of nerves near bone by [[xanthoma]]s, which are [[lipid]] deposits.  It can cause [[Horner's syndrome]], facial nerve paralysis, and [[femoral nerve]], [[tibial nerve]], [[radial nerve]], [[trigeminal nerve]], or [[recurrent laryngeal nerve]] paralysis.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
*'''Hypertrophic neuropathy'''  is also known as canine inherited demyelinative neuropathy (CIDN) and is inherited in the [[Tibetan Mastiff]]. Symptoms usually start between the ages of 7 and 10 weeks,<ref name=Ettinger_1995/> and include weakness, decreased reflexes, and loss of bark.  Sensory function remains, but a poor [[gait (dog)|gait]] or an inability to walk may present.  With no treatment available, the prognosis is guarded.  The trait is inherited as an [[recessive gene|autosomal recessive]].<ref name=small>{{cite web | title = Peripheral Nerve and Muscle Disorders: Small Animals | work = The Merck Veterinary Manual | year = 2006 | url = http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/100419.htm | accessdate = 2007-02-11 }}</ref>
*'''[[Hypoglycemia]]'''-induced  polyneuropathy is especially seen in conjunction with [[insulinoma]].
*'''[[Myasthenia gravis]]'''
*'''Polyradiculoneuritis''' is inflammation of the nerve roots.  The most common type is '''[[Coonhound]] paralysis'''.  This is similar to [[Guillain–Barré syndrome]] in humans.  Coonhound paralysis seems to be secondary to a [[raccoon]] bite, probably due to some factor in the saliva.  However, it can also occur without any interaction with a raccoon. It can happen in any breed of dog.  When associated with a raccoon bite, the symptoms start 7 to 11 days after the bite,<ref name=Ettinger_1995/> and include rear leg weakness progressing rapidly to [[paresis]], and decreased reflexes.  When not associated with a raccoon bite, the same symptoms occur, with the paresis taking about 3–4 days to reach its maximum effect. Severe cases have a loss of bark, trouble breathing, and an inability to lift the head.  Typically, the duration of the paralysis is 2 to 3 months,<ref name=Ettinger_1995/> but can last up to 6 months. Treatment is proper nursing care, and the prognosis is good in mild cases.<ref name=Goya_2006>{{cite web | year = 2007 | title = A case study of handling Coonhound Paralysis | url = http://coonhoundparalysis.blogspot.com/ | accessdate = 2007-02-18 }}</ref> In bad cases,<ref name=Goya_2006/> the dog does not completely recover the initial muscular capability but still is able to live for years.  In very bad cases, breathing can be impaired, and unless the dog is placed on a ventilator, suffocation will occur. Polyradiculoneuritis has also been seen 1-2o weeks after vaccination in dogs and cats.<ref>{{cite web | title = Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Neuromuscular Junction: Inflammatory Disorders | work = The Merck Veterinary Manual | year = 2006 | url = http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/100603.htm | accessdate = 2007-12-11 }}</ref>  It can also be caused by [[toxoplasmosis]].
*'''Rottweiler distal sensorimotor polyneuropathy''' is characterized by distal muscle denervation, but the cause is unknown.<ref name=smdeg/>  It affects young adult [[Rottweiler]]s.  The symptoms include weakness of all four legs and decreased reflexes.  The disease is gradually progressive.  Treatment is possible with [[corticosteroid]]s, but the prognosis is poor.
*'''Sensory neuropathies''' are inherited conditions in dogs and cause an inability to feel pain and a loss of [[proprioception]].  Self-mutilation is often seen.  No treatment has been found, and the prognosis is poor in severe cases.  Several breeds are affected:
**[[Boxer (dog)|Boxer]] symptoms usually occur around two months of age as a slowly progressive disease.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
**[[Dachshund]] (longhaired) disease usually occurs between 8 and 12 weeks of age,<ref name=Ettinger_1995/> and causes urinary incontinence, loss of pain sensation all over the body, and penis mutilation.  It is probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.<ref name=small/>
**[[Pointer (dog breed)|English Pointer]] illness usually occurs between the ages of 3 and 8 months<ref name=Ettinger_1995/> and most commonly involves licking and biting at the paws.  No treatment is known and a poor prognosis is given.  It is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.<ref name=small/>
*'''[[Spinal muscular atrophy]]''' occurs in cats and dogs, and is caused by the death of nerve cells in the spinal cord.  This progressive disease has no known treatment and a poor prognosis.  Affected dog breeds include the [[Swedish Lapland Dog]], [[Brittany (dog)|Brittany Spaniel]], [[Pointer (dog breed)|English Pointer]], German Shepherd dog, Rottweiler, and [[Cairn Terrier]].<ref name=Ettinger_1995/> [[Maine Coon]]s are one of the affected cat breeds.<ref>{{cite web |title=Spinal muscular atrophy in Maine Coon Cats (SMA)|url=http://www.dracoonfly.com/sma.pdf|publisher=Laboratory of  Comparative Medical Genetics|accessdate=9 March 2011|author= John C. Fyfe|location=2209 Biomedical Physical Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI  48824}}</ref>
*'''[[Tick paralysis]]''' is an acute, ascending motor paralysis that occurs in dogs and cats.<ref>{{cite journal|author1=Edlow, J. A.  |author2=McGillicuddy, D. C|title=Tick Paralysis|journal=Infectious Disease Clinics of North America|year=2008|volume=22|issue=3|pages=397–413|doi=10.1016/j.idc.2008.03.005|pmid=18755381}}</ref>   The cause is a [[neurotoxin]] in the saliva of certain species of adult [[tick]]s.  ''[[Dermacentor]]'' species predominate as a cause in North America, while ''[[Ixodes]]'' species mainly cause the disease in Australia.<ref name=Chrisman_2003/>  The onset of symptoms is 5 to 9 days after tick attachment,<ref>{{cite web | title = Tick Paralysis: Introduction | work = The Merck Veterinary Manual | year = 2006 | url = http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/102600.htm | accessdate = 2007-02-11 }}</ref> and include incoordination progressing to paralysis, changed voice, and difficulty eating.  Death can occur secondary to paralysis of the respiratory muscles, but in North America, a good prognosis results once the ticks are removed.  Recovery is usually in 1 to 3 days.<ref name=Chrisman_2003/>  In Australia, however, it is a more severe disease with [[cranial nerves|cranial nerve]] effects, and death can occur in 1 to 2 days.<ref name=Ettinger_1995/>
*'''Toxic neuropathies''' are most commonly caused by [[vincristine]], [[thallium]], and [[lead]]. In cats, the symptoms include paresis, hyporeflexia, and muscle tremors.<ref>Chandler, E. A.; et al. (2004) [https://books.google.com/books?id=jMSMaL8UnlQC&pg=PA159 ''Feline Medicine and Therapeutics''.] Oxford, UK: Blackwell Pub.; Ames, Iowa: Iowa State Press, pp. 159&ndash;160, {{ISBN|978-1-4051-2814-8}}.</ref>

==References==
{{Reflist}}

[[Category:Dog diseases]]
[[Category:Cat diseases]]