{{Short description|Genus of tapeworms}}
{{Automatic Taxobox
| name               = 
| image              = 
| image_caption      = 
| taxon              = Spirometra
| subdivision_ranks  = Species
| subdivision        = 
* ''S. erinaceieuropaei''
* ''S. mansonoides''
* ''S. felis''
* ''S. decipiens''
* ''S. urichi''
* ''S. ranarum''
}}

'''''Spirometra''''' is a [[genus]] of [[Pseudophyllidea|pseudophyllid]] [[cestoda|cestodes]] that reproduce in [[canidae|canines]] and [[felidae|feline]]s, but can also cause pathology in humans if infected.<ref name=":0" /> As an adult, this tapeworm lives in the [[small intestine]] of its [[definitive host]] and produces eggs that pass with the animal's [[feces]].  When the eggs reach water, the eggs hatch into [[coracidum|coracidia]] which are eaten by [[copepod]]s. The copepods are eaten by a second intermediate host to continue the life cycle.<ref name=":0" /> Humans can become infected if they accidentally eat frog legs or fish with the plerocercoid stage encysted in the muscle. In humans, an infection of ''Spirometra'' is termed [[sparganosis]].<ref name=":0">{{Cite web|url=https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/sparganosis/index.html|title=CDC - DPDx - Sparganosis|date=2017-12-30|website=www.cdc.gov|language=en-us|access-date=2018-04-24}}</ref>

== History ==
''Spirometra'' infections were first described by [[Patrick Manson]] from China in 1882, and the first human case was reported by [[Charles Wardell Stiles]] from Florida in 1908.<ref name=":1">{{cite journal | vauthors = Read CP | title = Human sparganosis in South Texas | journal = The Journal of Parasitology | volume = 38 | issue = 1 | pages = 29–31 | date = February 1952 | pmid = 14928149 | doi = 10.2307/3274168 | jstor = 3274168 }}</ref> Among this family of flatworms, there are a few species that show up most prominently in infections. One of these species is ''Spirometra erinaceieuropaei'', which is the main cause of infections in Europe and Asia, and rarely but sometimes in North and South America.<ref name=":2" /> The species that is the leading cause of infections in the Americas is ''Spirometra mansonoides.'' Some other species of ''Spirometra'' that have been diagnosed as causing infections are ''Spirometra felis, Spirometra decipiens,'' and ''Spirometra urichi.''<ref name=":2" /> The species ''Spirometra felis'' was found in domestic cats, as well as ''Spirometra decipiens.'' This same species, (''Spirometra decipiens)'' was also discovered when scientists fed dogs larvae from frogs.<ref name=":2" /> ''Spirometra decipiens'' &nbsp;has been identified in cats, dogs, and leopards. Finally, ''Spirometra urichi'' was identified through an infection of an ocelot in Trinidad.<ref name=":2">{{Cite web|url=http://www.aavp.org/wiki/cestodes/pseudophyllidea/spirometra/|title=Spirometra species {{!}} American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists|website=www.aavp.org|language=en-US|access-date=2018-04-24|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20180424201311/http://www.aavp.org/wiki/cestodes/pseudophyllidea/spirometra/|archive-date=2018-04-24|url-status=dead}}</ref>

== Life cycle ==
The adult worm of ''Spirometra'' species live in the [[small intestine]] of the definitive host—a dog, cat, raccoon, or other mammal—for up to 9 years, where they produce many eggs.<ref name=":3" /> When the host defecates, the eggs leave the body in the feces and hatch when they reach fresh water. The eggs are then eaten by copepods, which are considered the first intermediate hosts. In the copepods, the eggs develop into [[procercoid]] larvae that live in the body cavity of the copepod until the life cycle can continue. The second intermediate hosts include fish, reptiles, or amphibians that consume the copepods while drinking water.<ref name=":3">{{Cite web|url=http://eol.org/pages/4968439/details|title=Spirometra - Details - Encyclopedia of Life|website=Encyclopedia of Life|language=en|access-date=2018-04-24}}</ref> The larvae penetrate the intestinal tract of the second intermediate host, where they develop into the plerocercoid larvae and migrate and encyst into the subcutaneous tissues and muscles. After this step in the life cycle, the second intermediate host can get eaten by a larger fish or animal, but the plerocercoid larvae will not develop to a further developmental stage and will just re-encysts into the subcutaneous tissues and muscles of this new host. If this additional second intermediate host does not get eaten by a [[paratenic]] host, then the second intermediate host will eventually get eaten by a definitive host predator, typically a cat, and the cycle begins again.<ref name=":0" /> Humans are accidental hosts in the cycle, becoming infected with the plerocercoid larvae by ingestion of the first or second intermediate hosts. The larvae migrate to the subcutaneous tissues in humans; however, no further development takes place and the human is not capable of transmitting the disease. <ref>{{Cite web|url=https://web.gideononline.com/login.php?gdn_form=Y21kPXVuYXV0aCZ0YXJnZXQ9L3dlYi9lcGlkZW1pb2xvZ3kvaW5kZXgucGhw|title=GIDEON Sign In|website=web.gideononline.com|access-date=2018-04-24}}</ref>

== Pathology ==
The pathology of a ''Spirometra'' infection depends on the ending location of the migrating sparganum.<ref name=":4" /> The adult stage typically causes little to no pathology in the host. In paratenic hosts, plerocercoids migrate mainly to [[subcutaneous tissue]]s from the small intestine, causing pain, [[edema]], and [[inflammation]]. Sparganosis usually appears as slowly growing migratory subcutaneous nodules in the tissues of infected intermediate and paratenic hosts. The parasite can be found anywhere in the body including central nervous system.<ref name=":4">{{Cite news|url=http://vet.uga.edu/news/view/sparganosis_a_zoonotic_cestodiasis|title=Sparganosis: A Zoonotic Cestodiasis|date=July 31, 2013|work=UGA College of Veterinary Medicine|access-date=April 24, 2018|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20180424135932/http://vet.uga.edu/news/view/sparganosis_a_zoonotic_cestodiasis|archive-date=April 24, 2018|url-status=dead}}</ref> Few humans have died from this kind of infection, called [[sparganosis]].<ref name=":0" /> For more information about the symptoms and pathology associated with sparganosis, see the disease page of [[sparganosis]].

== Diagnosis ==
To diagnose a ''Spirometra'' infection in humans, a serodiagnosis ELISA can be used to target anti-sparganum IgG antibodies within the blood. This diagnostic method is useful around 10–12 days post infection and is almost 100% effective at detecting the anti-sparganum antibodies in the 14–22 days post infection.<ref>{{cite journal | vauthors = Hu DD, Cui J, Wang L, Liu LN, Wei T, Wang ZQ | title = Immunoproteomic Analysis of the Excretory-Secretory Proteins from Spirometra mansoni Sparganum | journal = Iranian Journal of Parasitology | volume = 8 | issue = 3 | pages = 408–16 | date = July 2013 | pmid = 24454434 | pmc = 3887242 }}</ref> Serodiagnosis of sparganosis is a useful early detection method. Another method of diagnosing sparganosis is a biopsy of a subcutaneous sample. An early detection sera detects the cysteine protease of some species of ''Spirometra'' excretory-secretory proteins.<ref name=":5">{{cite journal | vauthors = Liu LN, Zhang X, Jiang P, Liu RD, Zhou J, He RZ, Cui J, Wang ZQ | title = Serodiagnosis of sparganosis by ELISA using recombinant cysteine protease of Spirometra erinaceieuropaei spargana | journal = Parasitology Research | volume = 114 | issue = 2 | pages = 753–7 | date = February 2015 | pmid = 25532486 | doi = 10.1007/s00436-014-4270-5 | s2cid = 16815760 }}</ref> This option proves to be the best choice for early diagnostic methods in regards to early antigen identification.<ref name=":5" /> Some imaging methods such as CT or MRI scans can be used to identify spargana larvae in other areas of the body, like the brain.<ref>{{Cite web|url=http://www.isradiology.org/tropical_deseases/tmcr/chapter7/clinical13.htm|title=Tropical Medicine Central Resource|website=www.isradiology.org|access-date=2018-04-24|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20170302061256/http://www.isradiology.org/tropical_deseases/tmcr/chapter7/clinical13.htm|archive-date=2017-03-02|url-status=dead}}</ref> 

When diagnosing an infection in animals, proglottids from the worm itself may have broken off and ended up in the feces along with eggs.<ref name=":4" /> The proglottids can be microscopically identified as being in the Order of ''Pseudophyllidea'' because they have medial genital pores, but the actual genus of the worm could not be specifically identified from proglottids alone.<ref name=":4" /> The specificity of the worm genus or species would require differentiation based upon the uterus and egg morphology. 

== Treatment and prevention ==
The best way to treat this condition in humans is with surgery, as most drug treatments are unsuccessful at getting rid of the larval stages.<ref name=":0" /> 

In animals, infections with ''Spirometra'' species can be treated with praziquantel at 30-35 mg/kg, PO of SQ, for 2 consecutive days.<ref name=":6" />  Mebendazole at 11 mg/kg, PO, has also been successful. Taking an infected animal to a vet is the best option for ridding a pet of any developmental stage. <ref name=":6">{{Cite news|url=https://www.merckvetmanual.com/digestive-system/gastrointestinal-parasites-of-small-animals/tapeworms-in-dogs-and-cats|title=Tapeworms in Dogs and Cats - Digestive System |work=Merck Veterinary Manual|access-date=2018-04-24}}</ref>

Infection of humans may be prevented by avoiding eating under-cooked frog or fish, and avoiding drinking infected water.<ref name=":1"/>

== References ==
{{Reflist}}

{{Taxonbar|from=Q7578189}}

[[Category:Eucestoda]]
[[Category:Parasitic animals of mammals]]
[[Category:Cestoda genera]]